Updated LRO guidelines (#517)
Microsoft/api-guidelines: azure/ConsiderationsForServiceDesign.md

## Long-Running Operations

> Long-running operations (LROs) are an API design pattern that should be used when the processing of

Reviewer: I know we have discussed this prior but it would be nice to include a little more specificity into what a "significant amount of time" mean. Perhaps something like "the amount of time is call pattern specific and will vary from a service to another. However, the recommendation is for most services the P99 should complete within 10 seconds and P90 around 3 seconds." I see that we cover the numbers in the Guidelines.md file in the definition section but perhaps 1 second P99 is too stringent for most of the services?

This is certainly not critical for this iteration but perhaps once folks start asking for some guidance we can include some numbers.

Reviewer 2: Opened #542 to track.

The status monitor resource is distinct from the target resource (if any) and specific to the individual
operation request.

There are four types of LROs allowed in Azure REST APIs:

1. An LRO to create or replace a resource that involves additional long-running processing.
2. An LRO to delete a resource.
3. An LRO to perform an action on or with an existing resource (or resource collection).
4. An LRO to perform an action not related to an existing resource (or resource collection).

The following sections describe these patterns in detail.

### Create or replace a resource requiring additional long-running processing
<a href="#put-with-additional-long-running-processing"></a> <!-- Preserve anchor of previous heading -->

> A special case of long-running operation that occurs often is a PUT operation to create or replace a resource

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A special case of long-running operations that occurs often is a PUT operation to create or replace a resource
```

Or "... case of a long-running operation ..."

that involves some additional long-running processing.
One example is a resource that requires physical resources (e.g. servers) to be "provisioned" to make the resource functional.

In this case:
- The operation must use the PUT method (NOTE: PATCH is never allowed here)
- The URL identifies resource being created or replaced.
- The request and response body have identical schemas & represent the resource.

> - The request may contain an `Operation-Id` header that the service will use as

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure if we have described what should happen if an operation id is "reused"/already exists.

Reviewer 2: We do describe that in the guidelines

> **DO** fail a request with a `400-BadRequest` if the `Operation-Id` header matches an existing operation unless the request is identical to the prior request (a retry scenario).

but I will work it in here too.

> - The request may contain an `Operation-Id` header that the service will use as
> the ID of the status monitor created for the operation.

Reviewer 3: This won't render correctly. Either needs to be over 2 spaces, or just put it on the last line:

```suggestion
- The request may contain an `Operation-Id` header that the service will use as the ID of the status monitor created for the operation.
```

```text
PUT /items/FooBar&api-version=2022-05-01
Operation-Id: 22

{
   "prop1": 555,
   "prop2": "something"
}
```

In this case the response to the initial request is a `201 Created` to indicate that
the resource has been created or `200 OK` when the resource was replaced.
A status monitor is created to track the additional processing and the ID of the status monitor
is returned in the `Operation-Id` header of the response.

> The response may also include an `Operation-Location` header for backward compatibility.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The response must also include an `Operation-Location` header for backward compatibility.
```
I'm pretty sure all codegen will break if we don't include the Operation-Location header. We must not change guidance until we have verified that following doesn't break our toolchain. This includes making sure that TSP/azure core follows the new guidelines or else we just unleash an avalanche of issues.

If the resource supports ETags, the response may contain an `etag` header and possibly an `etag` property in the resource.

```text
HTTP/1.1 201 Created
Operation-Id: 22
Operation-Location: https://items/operations/22
etag: "123abc"

{
  "id": "FooBar",
  "etag": "123abc",
  "prop1": 555,

>   "prop2": "something"

Reviewer 4: We should include an indication of the current status of the resource (specifically that it is not fully created). If we don't, only the initiator of the potentially fairly long running operation can discover the state of the system. This was clearly called out in the earlier MS wide API guidelines, and I think it got lost somewhere along the way.

Reviewer 5: I think the origin design on this PUT to resource with additional long-running processing, is that the response of the PUT is the resource. And there is no `status` on that resource (the `status` is a property in status monitor, not a property in resource).

Therefore I don't think we should put the `status` here in PUT response.

---

Here is a runtime behavior of the PUT (create resource with additional long-running processing) in cadl-ranch
https://github.com/Azure/cadl-ranch/blob/main/packages/cadl-ranch-specs/http/azure/core/lro/standard/main.tsp#L67-L109

The status monitor resource is distinct from the target resource (if any) and specific to the individual
operation request.

There are four types of LROs allowed in Azure REST APIs:

> 1. An LRO to create or replace a resource that involves additional long-running processing.

Reviewer: Minor: I think the list is somewhat redundant as it's pretty much applies to every operation?

Reviewer 3: It is actually mentioned here: https://github.com/microsoft/api-guidelines/blob/vNext/azure/Guidelines.md#lro-response-time

Maybe it's worth including a link? I don't think we should repeat lest we forget to update one...since we have been talking about updating the guidance on what is "long".

Reviewer 2: This list is a categorization of LRO types that each have specific requirements. It is intended to prepare the reader for the description of each type separately below.

- The URL identifies the resource being created or replaced.
- The request and response body have identical schemas & represent the resource.
- The request may contain an `Operation-Id` header that the service will use as
the ID of the status monitor created for the operation.
- If the `Operation-Id` matches an existing operation and the request content is the same,
treat as a retry and return the same response as the earlier request.
Otherwise fail the request with a `400-BadRequest`.

```text
PUT /items/FooBar&api-version=2022-05-01
Operation-Id: 22

{
   "prop1": 555,
   "prop2": "something"
}
```

In this case the response to the initial request is a `201 Created` to indicate that
the resource has been created or `200 OK` when the resource was replaced.
The response body should be a representation of the resource that was created,
and should include a `status` field indicating the current status of the resource.
A status monitor is created to track the additional processing and the ID of the status monitor
is returned in the `Operation-Id` header of the response.
The response must also include an `Operation-Location` header for backward compatibility.

> If the resource supports ETags, the response may contain an `etag` header and possibly an `etag` property in the resource.

Reviewer 4: Per RFC9110:

> An origin server MUST NOT send a validator field ([Section 8.8](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#response.validator)), such as an [ETag](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#field.etag) or [Last-Modified](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#field.last-modified) field, in a successful response to PUT unless the request's representation data was saved without any transformation applied to the content

Since the `status` property is readOnly, I don't see any situation where the service would be allowed to send an  etag header.

Reviewer 2: This is an interesting wrinkle! The sentence just after the one you quote is:
> This requirement allows a user agent to know when the representation it sent (and retains in memory) is the result of the PUT, and thus it doesn't need to be retrieved again from the origin server.

In Azure, a PUT always returns a representation of the resource, so the user agent does not need to retrieve the resource to know the representation corresponding to an eTag present in the response.

But if we chose to follow this aspect of the HTTP spec, I think eTags would have to be eliminated from the vast majority of PUT responses in Azure -- not just LRO puts. Any resource with a readOnly field would be barred from returning an eTag from PUT.

Reviewer 2: In any event, this language is unchanged from the current version, so what you are pointing out is a problem with the current published guidelines and not this PR. I've opened #540 for this and we can address it in a follow-on PR if appropriate.

The status monitor resource is distinct from the target resource (if any) and specific to the individual
operation request.

There are four types of LROs allowed in Azure REST APIs:

1. An LRO to create or replace a resource that involves additional long-running processing.
2. An LRO to delete a resource.
3. An LRO to perform an action on or with an existing resource (or resource collection).
4. An LRO to perform an action not related to an existing resource (or resource collection).

The following sections describe these patterns in detail.

### Create or replace a resource requiring additional long-running processing
<a href="#put-with-additional-long-running-processing"></a> <!-- Preserve anchor of previous heading -->

A special case of long-running operations that occurs often is a PUT operation to create or replace a resource
that involves some additional long-running processing.
One example is a resource that requires physical resources (e.g. servers) to be "provisioned" to make the resource functional.

In this case:
- The operation must use the PUT method (NOTE: PATCH is never allowed here)

> - The URL identifies resource being created or replaced.

Author: ```suggestion
- The URL identifies the resource being created or replaced.
```

- The request and response body have identical schemas & represent the resource.
- The request may contain an `Operation-Id` header that the service will use as
the ID of the status monitor created for the operation.
- If the `Operation-Id` matches an existing operation and the request content is the same,
treat as a retry and return the same response as the earlier request.

> Otherwise fail the request with a `400-BadRequest`.

Author: I think 409-Conflict is better here to indicate that this client operation would normally work fine but it doesn't now due to the conflict.

Reviewer 2: That may be true but the [OASIS Repeatable Requests spec](https://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/repeatable-requests/v1.0/cs01/repeatable-requests-v1.0-cs01.html#sec_ServerBehavior) requires a `400 Bad Request` for the analogous situation:
> The server SHOULD return an error `400 Bad Request` along with a `Repeatability-Result` value of `rejected` if `Repeatability-Request-ID` is non-null and the request verb, URI, or header fields other than `Date` are different from that of the original request.

I think it's better to be consistent here.

Author: But are we recommending the OASIS headers be used here?
I would think that customers idempotency (and other benefits) by passing Operation-Id header and that idempotency is not an issue at all if they don't pass it as each invocation would start a new LRO.

I was hoping services could just avoid the OASIS headers for LROs entirely.

Reviewer 4: 400 makes sense for OASIS given their definitions for the repeatability request id value:

> Repeatability-Request-ID MUST be sent by clients to specify that a request is repeatable. The value of the Repeatability-Request-ID is an opaque string representing a client-generated, globally unique for all time, identifier for the request

If we include the same verbiage for operation ids, then 400 makes sense for operation id. If we don't, then 409 seem like the right choice.

Reviewer 2: I discussed offline with @JeffreyRichter and he convinced me to change this to 409.

```text
PUT /items/FooBar&api-version=2022-05-01
Operation-Id: 22

{
   "prop1": 555,
   "prop2": "something"
}
```

In this case the response to the initial request is a `201 Created` to indicate that
the resource has been created or `200 OK` when the resource was replaced.
The response body should be a representation of the resource that was created,

> and should include a `status` field to indicate whether the additional processing has completed.

Author: ```suggestion
and should include a `status` field indicating the current status of the resource.
```

Author: This status field is NOT the same as the status monitor's status field as this status is NOT terminal. A VM might change from provisioned to unprovisioned or from off to running multiple times over its lifetime. Polling should be against the status monitor; not the resource's status field.

A status monitor is created to track the additional processing and the ID of the status monitor
is returned in the `Operation-Id` header of the response.
The response must also include an `Operation-Location` header for backward compatibility.
If the resource supports ETags, the response may contain an `etag` header and possibly an `etag` property in the resource.

```text
HTTP/1.1 201 Created
Operation-Id: 22
Operation-Location: https://items/operations/22
etag: "123abc"

{
  "id": "FooBar",
  "status": "Provisioning",
  "prop1": 555,
  "prop2": "something",
  "etag": "123abc"
}
```

The client will issue a GET to the status monitor to obtain the status of the operation performing the additional processing.

```text
GET https://items/operations/22?api-version=2022-05-01
```

> When the additional processing completes, the status monitor will indicate if it succeeded or failed.

Author: ```suggestion
When the additional processing completes, the status monitor indicates if it succeeded or failed.
```

```text
HTTP/1.1 200 OK

{
   "id": "22",
   "status": "Succeeded"
}
```

If the additional processing failed, the service may delete the original resource if it is not usable in this state,
but should clearly document this behavior.

### Long-running delete operation

> A long-running delete operation follows the general pattern of a long-running operation --

Author: ```suggestion
A long-running delete operation returns a `202 Accepted` with a status monitor which the client uses to determine the outcome of the delete.
```

> it returns a `202 Accepted` with a status monitor which the client uses to determine the outcome of the delete.

Author: ```suggestion
```

The resource being deleted should remain visible (returned from a GET) until the delete operation completes successfully.

> When the delete operation completes successfully, a client must be able to create a new resource with same name without conflicts.

Author: ```suggestion
When the delete operation completes successfully, a client must be able to create a new resource with the same name without conflicts.
```

with the [Long Running Operations](#long-running-operations) pattern.

The operation is initiated with a POST operation and the operation path ends in `:<action>`.

> A long-running POST should not be used for resource create -- use PUT as described above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A long-running POST should not be used for resource creation: use PUT as described above.
```

Reviewer 2: A colon doesn't seem right to me here, but I'm far from a grammar expert. Can you say why you recommend this over a dash?

Reviewer 3: Put simply, dashes are typically used for a related clause while colons are used to describe or exemplify the preceding text.

> PATCH must never be used for long-running operations -- it should be reserved for simple resource updates.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
PATCH must never be used for long-running operations: it should be reserved for simple resource updates.
```

}
```

This diagram illustrates how a long-running action operation is initiated and then how the client
determines it has completed and obtains its results:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Client
    participant API Endpoint
    participant Status Monitor
    Client->>API Endpoint: POST
    API Endpoint->>Client: HTTP/1.1 202 Accepted<br/>{ "id": "22", "status": "NotStarted" }
    Client->>Status Monitor: GET
    Status Monitor->>Client: HTTP/1.1 200 OK<br/>Retry-After: 5<br/>{ "id": "22", "status": "Running" }
    Client->>Status Monitor: GET
    Status Monitor->>Client: HTTP/1.1 200 OK<br/>{ "id": "22", "status": "Succeeded", "result": { ... } }
```

1. The client sends the request to initiate the long-running action operation.
The request may contain an `Operation-Id` header that the service uses as the ID of the status monitor created for the operation.

> 2. The service validates the request and initiates the operation processing.
> If there are any problems with the request, the service responds with a `4xx` status code and error response body.
> Otherwise the service responds with a `202-Accepted` HTTP status code.
> The response body is the status monitor for the operation including the ID, either from the request header or generated by the service.
> When returning a status monitor whose status is not in a terminal state, the response must also include a `retry-after` header indicating the minimum number of seconds the client should wait
> before polling (GETing) the status monitor URL again for an update.
> For backward compatibility, the response may also include an `Operation-Location` header containing the absolute URL
> of the status monitor resource (without an api-version query parameter).

Reviewer 3: This won't render correctly. If you break on a numbered list, you must shift subsequent text to where the first line's text begins (2 spaces for `* ` or `- `, 3 spaces for `1. `, etc.

```suggestion
2. The service validates the request and initiates the operation processing.
   If there are any problems with the request, the service responds with a `4xx` status code and error response body.
   Otherwise the service responds with a `202-Accepted` HTTP status code.
   The response body is the status monitor for the operation including the ID, either from the request header or generated by the service.
   When returning a status monitor whose status is not in a terminal state, the response must also include a `retry-after` 
   header indicating the minimum number of seconds the client should wait
   before polling (GETing) the status monitor URL again for an update.
   For backward compatibility, the response may also include an `Operation-Location` header containing the absolute URL
   of the status monitor resource (without an api-version query parameter).
```

You'll need to fix this for all numbered items you modified.

Reviewer 3: Or, just quit trying to make so many new lines and let the text flow. It's all going to wrap in raw and rendered HTML text anyway. So much easier to make changes in the long run.

Reviewer 2: I don't remember making these changes. I will try to minimize the changes from the prior version.

Reviewer 2: Actually I didn't make these changes and the original seems to format correctly. So I will leave it alone for now and we can check it again in the next round of review.

Reviewer 3: GitHub must use a relaxed markdown renderer then. It's actually a violation of CommonMark.

The GET operation for the status monitor is documented in the REST API definition and the ID
is the last URL path segment.

4. The status monitor responds with information about the operation including its current status,
which should be represented as one of a fixed set of string values in a field named `status`.
If the operation is still being processed, the status field will contain a "non-terminal" value, like `NotStarted` or `Running`.

5. After the operation processing completes, a GET request to the status monitor returns the status monitor with a status field set to a terminal value -- `Succeeded`, `Failed`, or `Canceled` -- that indicates the result of the operation.
If the status is `Failed`, the status monitor resource contains an `error` field with a `code` and `message` that describes the failure.
If the status is `Succeeded`, the operation results will be returned in the `result` field of the status monitor.

6. There may be some cases where a long-running action operation can be completed before the response to the initial request.
In these cases, the operation should still return a `202 Accepted` with the `status` property set to the appropriate terminal state.

> 7. The service is responsible for purging the status-monitor resource.

Reviewer 3: It's not a compound adjective.

```suggestion
7. The service is responsible for purging the status monitor resource.
```

It should auto-purge the status monitor resource after completion (at least 24 hours).
The service may offer DELETE of the status monitor resource due to GDPR/privacy.

### Long-running action operation not related to a resource

When an long-running action operation is not related to a specific resource (a batch operation is one example),
another approach is needed.

> A long-running action operation not related to a resource should use a PUT operation for a resource that combines a status monitor with the request and results of the operation. In this pattern, clients obtain the status of the operation by issuing a GET on the same URL as the PUT operation.

Reviewer 3: This doesn't make sense. An LRO action operation *not related to a resource* should use a PUT operation *for a resource*...

You just said it isn't related to a resource. So how I can I do a PUT to a resource? How is that resource associated?

Reviewer 2: Agreed. I have revised the text here to eliminate this confusion (and hopefully not create any new confusion).

When a long-running action operation is not related to a specific resource (a batch operation is one example),
another approach is needed.

This type of LRO should be initiated with a PUT method on a URL that represents the operation to be performed,
and includes a final path parameter for the user-specified operation ID.
The response of the PUT includes a response body containing a representation of the status monitor for the operation
and an `Operation-Location` response header that contains the absolute URL of the status monitor.
In this type of LRO, the status monitor should include any information from the request used to initiate the operation,
so that a failed operation could be reissued if necessary.

Clients will use a GET on the status monitor URL to obtain the status and results of the operation.
Since the HTTP semantic for PUT is to create a resource, the same schema should be used for the PUT request body,
the PUT response body, and the response body of the GET for the status monitor for the operation.
For this type of LRO, the status monitor URL should be the same URL as the PUT operation.

The following examples illustrate this pattern.

```text

> PUT /translate-operations/<operation-id>

Reviewer 5: nit, api-version

```suggestion
PUT /translate-operations/<operation-id>?api-version=2022-05-01
```

<JSON body with parameters for the operation>
```

Note that the client specifies the operation id in the URL path.

A successful response to the PUT operation should have a `201 Created` status and response body
that contains a representation of the status monitor _and_ any information from the request used to initiate the operation.

The service is responsible for purging the status monitor after some period of time.

> It should auto-purge this resource after completion (at least 24 hours).

Reviewer 5: nit, this sentence may need rephase.

Maybe "This status monitor resource should be retained for at least 24 hours after completion. The service should auto-purge it afterward."

> The service is responsible for purging the status monitor after some period of time.
> It should auto-purge this resource after completion (at least 24 hours).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The service is responsible for purging the status monitor after some period of time,
but no earlier than 24 hours after the completion of the operation.
```

}
```

This diagram illustrates how a long-running action operation is initiated and then how the client
determines it has completed and obtains its results:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Client
    participant API Endpoint
    participant Status Monitor
    Client->>API Endpoint: POST
    API Endpoint->>Client: HTTP/1.1 202 Accepted<br/>{ "id": "22", "status": "NotStarted" }
    Client->>Status Monitor: GET
    Status Monitor->>Client: HTTP/1.1 200 OK<br/>Retry-After: 5<br/>{ "id": "22", "status": "Running" }
    Client->>Status Monitor: GET
    Status Monitor->>Client: HTTP/1.1 200 OK<br/>{ "id": "22", "status": "Succeeded", "result": { ... } }
```

1. The client sends the request to initiate the long-running action operation.

> The request may contain an `Operation-Id` header that the service uses as the ID of the status monitor created for the operation.

Author: I wonder if the "may" should be a "should" or "must" as we really want service teams to support the Operation-Id header so that customers can be in control of the Ids.

Reviewer 2: What I meant by "may" here is that the client "may" send it -- that the service accepts it as an optional parameter. In the Guidelines doc we express the service behavior side of this as a **MUST**:
> **DO** allow the client to pass an `Operation-Id` header with a ID for the status monitor for the operation.

of the status monitor resource (without an api-version query parameter).

3. After waiting at least the amount of time specified by the previous response's `Retry-after` header,
the client issues a GET request to the status monitor using the ID in the body of the initial response.
The GET operation for the status monitor is documented in the REST API definition and the ID
is the last URL path segment.

4. The status monitor responds with information about the operation including its current status,
which should be represented as one of a fixed set of string values in a field named `status`.
If the operation is still being processed, the status field will contain a "non-terminal" value, like `NotStarted` or `Running`.

5. After the operation processing completes, a GET request to the status monitor returns the status monitor with a status field set to a terminal value -- `Succeeded`, `Failed`, or `Canceled` -- that indicates the result of the operation.
If the status is `Failed`, the status monitor resource contains an `error` field with a `code` and `message` that describes the failure.

> If the status is `Succeeded`, the operation results will be returned in the `result` field of the status monitor.

Author: ```suggestion
If the status is `Succeeded`, the operation results (if any) are returned in the `result` field of the status monitor.
```

6. There may be some cases where a long-running action operation can be completed before the response to the initial request.
In these cases, the operation should still return a `202 Accepted` with the `status` property set to the appropriate terminal state.

7. The service is responsible for purging the status monitor resource.
It should auto-purge the status monitor resource after completion (at least 24 hours).
The service may offer DELETE of the status monitor resource due to GDPR/privacy.

### Long-running action operation not related to a resource

> When an long-running action operation is not related to a specific resource (a batch operation is one example),

Author: ```suggestion
When a long-running action operation is not related to a specific resource (a batch operation is one example),
```

another approach is needed.

This type of LRO should be initiated with a PUT method on a URL that represents the operation to be performed,
and includes a final path parameter for the user-specified operation ID.
The response of the PUT includes a response body containing a representation of the status monitor for the operation
and an `Operation-Location` response header that contains the absolute URL of the status monitor.
In this type of LRO, the status monitor should include any information from the request used to initiate the operation,
so that a failed operation could be reissued if necessary.

> Since the HTTP semantic for PUT is to create a resource, a subsequent GET on the URL to initiate the LRO

Author: ```suggestion
The status monitor schema is the same for the PUT request, PUT response, and GET response.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should require the PUT request contain the status monitor fields. If it did, all would have to be marked `readOnly: true`, which only creates opportunities for errors.

Author: But it is a REST mandate that resource schema sent to PUT is identical to the resource schema returned from PUT and we have adhered to this in all our other Azure guidelines. The status monitor fields should not be passed in to PUT and therefore readOnly:true is useful here just like any other PUT that can return fields that can't be passed.

I absolutely appreciate the issues with potential errors and perhaps we can have linter rules that help with this for this specific scenario. but I don't think we should deviate from all the other REST/Azure guidance.

Reviewer 2: Reworded along the lines of @JeffreyRichter 's suggestion.

> should return the same response as the PUT: the status monitor for the operation.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Clients will use a GET on the status monitor URL to obtain the status and results of the operation.

> So ror this type of LRO, the status monitor URL should be the same URL as the PUT operation.

Author: ```suggestion
So for this type of LRO, the status monitor URL should be the same URL as the PUT operation.
```

The following examples illustrate this pattern.

```text
PUT /translate-operations/<operation-id>

<JSON body with parameters for the operation>
```

Note that the client specifies the operation id in the URL path.

A successful response to the PUT operation should have a `201 Created` status and response body

> that contains a representation of the status monitor _and_ ny information from the request used to initiate the operation.

Author: ```suggestion
that contains a representation of the status monitor _and_ any information from the request used to initiate the operation.
```
